TITLE: Observing Research Interest Over Time

PURPOSE: Provide interactive display of various data focused on how research interest in Computer science departments across the country has changed over the years.

DEMO: https://mediaspace.illinois.edu/media/t/1_a9qaqhmz

INSTALLATION: This application requires the four python files (app.py, bf_mongodb.py, bf_mysql.py, and bf_neo4j.py) and mysql(port 3306), mongodb (port 27017), and neo4j (port 7687) databases running locally with the academicworld data from this semester uploaded to each of them. These files use Python v3. The four python files need to be in the same folder. The application is started by running the command "python app.py". After it has started up the application can be accessed through the web browser with the URL "http://127.0.0.1:8050/". 

USAGE: The application is a user interactive dashboard with six different widgets each displaying different information and having different user interaction. 1) The first widget displays a chart tracking the number of times a given keyword is mentioned in all of the publications each year. The user can input the keyword that the chart tracks. The default keyword is "keyword". 2) The second widget is a table that displays the top 10 most commonly used keywords among publications for a given year. There is a drop down option to select the year. The default is 2021. 3) The third widget is a table that displays the top 5 professors by either the number of publications or total number of citations in a given year. There are two radio buttons that user can select to switch the list baseed on number of publications or citations. There is also a drop down to select the year. 4) The fourth widget is similar to the third, but displays the information for Universities as a whole instead of individual faculty. There are radio buttons to switch between number of publications as well as a drop down to select the year. 5) The fifth widget diplays faculty members with their photos and which university they work for. By default it displays a random faculty member and there is a button to generate a new random faculty. There is also an innput field and button to search for a specific faculty by their name. Below this there are fields to enter information for a new faculty member. After hitting the submit button, this user can be searched by name. 6) The last widget is a table showing the publication with the most amount of citations each year going back 50 years. The user has the ability to modify the publication title by clicking on the title in the table, and entering the new title in the input at the top and clicking "edit". This change will get made in the database as well. 

DESIGN: This application is a web client dashboard that consisists of various html figures and tables built through Dash Plotly using python. The dashboard uses the academicworld dataset we have been using this semester. It is stored in and queried from a MySQL, MongoDB, and Neo4j database. While the data was the same amongst the three databases (although it appears the publication/keyword data wasn't as robust in the MySQL DB), qeuerying was performed to each was based on the type of query and information that was being requested. The focus of this dashboard was to see how research has changed over time, so most of the queries performed looked at data changing over time. Depending on the data and the query language abilities, different widgets made use of different databases.

IMPLEMENTATION: Each database engine (MySQL,MongoDB,Neo4j) was already installed on my computer locally with the academicworld dataset uploaded to them as part of previous CS411 assigments this semester. The Web dashboard was built using Python Dash Ploty and its libraries. This can be found in the app.py file that contains all of the functionality visible to the user. I used the DataTable to build the tables in widgets 2,3 and 6, the line figure for widget 1, and the bar figure for widget 5. I also made use of the Input, DrowDown, Button, and Radio button functionalties in each widget to allow for user interaction. Each widget uses a CallBack function to perform the updates on the dashboard based on the user interaction. These callbacks use imort classes and methods from the bf_mysql, bf_mongodb, and bf_neo4j python files that contain the classes and functions used to connect to the databases and perform queries. When the application first starts up, it initiates instances of a class from each of these files which creates the connections to the databases. These instances are then used in the callbacks to perform the queries to update the data on the dashboard. These instances are used throughout the application. MySQL required two instances, but mongodb and neo4j just used one. In each of the three databse py files there are methods for each of the qeuries needed to select or update data from the databases. They take the variables (year, publication, citation, etc) as input and return the data as it it returned from each database. This data is parsed in the callback functions in app.py. 

DATABASE TECHNIQUES: Each databas python file (bf_mongodb.py, bf_mysql.py, bf_neo4j.py) uses predefined queries with inputs coming from users in app.py. The queries in bf_mysql.py are implemented as prepared statements to help them run faster. Additionally I added an index to my Neo4j database on the numCitations column in the Publications table since I had three sepearate widgets/queries using this column. The query used in widget 6 originally took 10 seconds to run before the index, but now runs in about 1 second. For widget 5, users can add a new faculty entry. Only the id column is required not to be NULL, but I wanted to make sure the university id was NULL, so I added a trigger in MySQL that would run before insert if this column was NULL. It changed the value from NULL to 12 which is the id for University of Illinois. 

